## Results

Both MCMC convergence and effective sample size of the different *jSDMs* were satisfactory (see Appendix D).

### Model Fit & Predictive power

#### Species level

Presence/absence models showed excellent explanatory power with mean AUCs above 0.9 on the train dataset, but lower predictive power with mean AUCs around 0.66 on the test set (Fig. S17). Both explanatory (mean AUC between 0.92 and 0.93) and predictive (mean AUC between 0.64 and 0.66) power were overall similar across models (@fig:chapt1fig2, Fig. S17). Within the target species assemblage, predictions improved for 41 species and worsened for 36 species (out of the 99 target species, which implies marginal changes for the remaining 22) in the *WhC* model relative to the benchmark. In comparison in the *Ph* or the *TrPh* models, predictions only improved for 26 and 27 species, respectively, and worsened for 49 and 48 species, respectively.

Abundance models also showed a satisfactory explanatory power with a mean RMSE close to nine for all models, given a mean abundance in the train dataset of 307.31 ± 583.58 (mean ± sd). Overall, all models underpredicted species abundances (Fig. S18-19). While explanatory power was similar across models, larger variations were observed for predictive power. The *Bench* model had a mean RMSE of 126.67 (for a mean abundance in the test dataset of 700.57 ± 818.66; Fig S17). The Ph model performed better (mean RMSE of 62.23; -50.87% compared to the *Bench*; Fig. S17) whereas the *TrPh* model did worse (mean RMSE of 139.21; +9.90%; Fig. S17). The best model was the *WhC* with a mean RMSE of 6.59 (-94.80% compared to the *Bench*, Fig. S17). Out of the 99 target species, the *WhC* model predictions improved for 57 species but declined for 15 species relative to the Bench. Conversely, performance gain for the *Ph* and *TrPh* models were poor relative to the Bench, as predictions improved for 38 and 31 species, respectively, but declined for 40 and 46 species, respectively.

We further investigated this gain in predictive power of the *WhC* model fitted to abundance data by examining the relationships between changes in predictive power and the occurrence or abundance of the species. On the test set, performance of the *WhC* model most improved relative to the *Bench* model for rare species (correlation with average species abundance: Kendall’s $\tau = 0.12$, $\text{p-value} < 0.05$; Fig. S20). However, we found no patterns between change in RMSE relative to the Bench model and proportion of presence (Kendall’s $τ\tau = 0.12$, $\text{p-value} = 0.09$; Fig S21).

![Change in explanatory and predictive power of three model structures (yellow for *Phylogeny* (*Ph*), red for *Traits and phylogeny* (*TrPh*), and green for *Whole community* (*WhC*) models) relative to the *Benchmark model* (*Bench*; purple). Changes are expressed as percentages relative to the benchmark fitted on presence/absence (top row) or abundance (bottom row) data. Points above the zero line indicate performance gain.](03-Chapitre1/figures/fig2.png){#fig:chapt1fig2}

#### Community level

In terms of alpha diversity, the *Bench*, the *Ph* and *TrPh* models fitted on abundance data all underpredicted mean species richness of the train set by 4 species on average (-29.2% compared to observed data; @fig:chapt1fig3). In contrast, the *WhC* model overpredicted mean richness by 11 species on average (+80% compared with observed data). Similar results were found on the test dataset with the *Bench*, *Ph* and *TrPh* models underpredicting richness by 5 species (-24.9 %) on average whereas the *WhC* model overpredicted richness by 7 species (+35.8% compared with observed data). Similar results were found for models fitted on presence/absence data (Fig. S22).

All models overall underpredicted mean total abundance relative to the train dataset (@fig:chapt1fig3), by 153 individuals for the *Bench* model (-49.8% compared to observed data) and by 159 and 155 individuals (-51.7% and -50.4%) for the *Ph* and *TrPh* models, respectively. The *WhC* model only underpredicted total abundance by 22 individuals (-7.12% compared to observed data). Relative to the test dataset, the *Bench*, the *Ph* and the *TrPh* models overpredicted mean total abundance by 1642 (+234% compared to observations), 465 (+66.3%), and 1969 individuals (+281%), respectively. In contrast, the *WhC* model underpredicted mean total abundance of the test data samples by 404 individuals on average (-57.6%).

Mean beta diversity patterns in the train dataset were overall well captured by all models fitted on abundance or presence/absence data (@fig:chapt1fig3). Observed dissimilarities were slightly overpredicted by all abundance models: by 0.057 for the *Bench* (+7.3% compared with observed data), 0.050 for the *Ph* (+6.4%), 0.054 for the *TrPh* (+6.9%) and 0.070 for the *WhC* models (+8.9%). Differences for presence/absence models were of similar order but all models underpredicted mean pairwise dissimilarities between samples (Fig. S22). On the test dataset, beta diversity patterns were rather poorly captured by the models fitted on abundance data. The Bench model overpredicted the pairwise dissimilarities by 0.364 on average (+67.1% compared with observed data), the *Ph* model by 0.365 (+67.4%), the *TrPh* model by 0.375 (+69.1%) and the *WhC* model by 0.338 (+62.4%). Similar results were observed for presence/absence models with slightly smaller overpredictions (Fig. S22).

![Comparison of model performances with regards to their ability to predict community structures when fitted with abundance data for the train (purple) and test (yellow) dataset. Left: differences in pairwise dissimilarities estimated on the observed and the predicted assemblages. Centre: differences in species richness between observed and predicted assemblages. Right: differences in total abundance between observed and predicted assemblages.](03-Chapitre1/figures/fig3.png){#fig:chapt1fig3}

### Variance partitioning

The mean amount of total variance explained across the 99 polychaetes varied between 21 and 23% for models fitted with presence/absence data and between 18 and 30% for abundance-based models (Fig. S23). For all models, environmental variables, rather than random effects, accounted for most (more than 68% ± 18%; mean ± s.d.) of the explained variance (Fig. S24). However, a larger part of variance is explained by random effects in the *WhC* model compared to the other models, including the Bench (Fig. S24). Compared to the *Bench* model fitted with abundance data, the relative change in the part of variance explained by random effects across the 99 species decreased by 17.00% for the *Ph* model, 10.90% for the *TrPh* model and increased by 224% for the *WhC* model (@fig:chapt1fig4). Similar results with smaller relative changes were obtained across presence/absence models (@fig:chapt1fig4 ; Fig. S23-24).

![Change in explained variance related to environmental predictors (left column) and random effects (right column) for three alternative model structures (yellow for *Phylogeny* (*Ph*), red for *Traits and phylogeny* (*TrPh*), and green for *Whole community* (*WhC*) models) relative to the *Benchmark model* (*Bench*; purple). Percentage changes were computed relative to the *Benchmark model* fitted with presence/absence (top panels) or abundance (bottom panels) data. Positive values indicate an increase in the proportion of variance explained by the focal model compared to the *Benchmark model*. See Figure S23 and S24 for the raw percentages, expressed as percentages of explained variance or total amount of variance respectively.](03-Chapitre1/figures/fig4.png){#fig:chapt1fig4}

### Species niche estimated

For abundance models, the large majority (>60%) of flat response curves indicated a lack of meaningful species-environment relationships (@fig:chapt1fig5). This proportion reached 83% for the *WhC* model. The prevalence of flat relationships did not appear to be related to convergence issues (Fig. S15-16) or to be driven by a specific covariate (Fig. S25). Convex or concave response curves were rare in abundance models. Significant relationships primarily included constant or accelerated declines, representing approximately 10% and 15% of response curves in the *Bench*, *TrPh*, and *Ph* models (@fig:chapt1fig5). In the *WhC* model, these percentages decreased to 7% and 6%, respectively (@fig:chapt1fig5). Similar findings were observed for presence/absence models (Fig. S26; Fig. S27).

![Number (y-axis) and proportion (computed across all coefficients for each model, as indicated above individual bars) of response curves (i.e. one for each species-predictor combination according to the typology (nine shapes highlighted by the black curve in each panel) defined by @Rigal_2020. Results are presented for the different model structures ](03-Chapitre1/figures/fig5.png){#fig:chapt1fig5}

Both abundance and presence/absence *TrPh* models (which include species functional traits) reveal some meaningful trait-environment relationships between the first fuzzy-PCA axis and the seven environmental predictors. This suggests that the occurrence of certain traits is likely favored (or hindered) under certain environmental conditions (Fig. S28). For instance, mobile predatory species showed larger declines in abundance as fetch increases than sessile suspensivores (Fig. S28). Moreover, increase in organic matter concentration and decrease in current velocities were associated with higher abundances of suspensive feeders.

### Exploring the residual correlation

Residual species-species correlations were compared between the *Bench* model and the *WhC* model, only for the 99 target species, using both presence/absence (Fig S29) and abundance data (@fig:chapt1fig6). We only focus this comparison on the *WhC* model (rather than other models) because of its higher predictive performance and higher proportion of explained variance by random effects (@fig:chapt1fig4). Residual correlations estimated from both models were highly correlated, both for presence/absence and abundance data (@fig:chapt1fig6 and Fig. S29). However, agreement between models varied across different random effects from a moderate correlation between residuals associated with the Habitat random effects ($\text{R}^2=0.57$) or with the Site random effects ($\text{R}^2=0.64$), to a high correlation between residuals related to the Year random effects ($\text{R}^2=0.95$). The $\delta$ index main modal distribution, which is centered on zero, confirms an overall agreement between residual correlations estimated from both models in relation to the Year random effects with a marginal proportion of sign changes (0.45% of sign changes related to correlation greater than 0.25; @fig:chapt1fig6 B) only related to low species-species residual correlations (<0.25; @fig:chapt1fig6 A and Fig. S29). In contrast, the $\delta$ index highlights inconsistencies in both magnitude and signs changes between residuals associated with the Habitat and the Site (12.2% and 9.11% of sign changes related to correlation greater than 0.25) random effects. Similar results were obtained for presence/absence models (Fig. S29).

![(A) Comparison of residual species-species correlations associated with the three random effects estimated by the *Whole Community Model* (*WhC*; y-axis) and the *Benchmark model* (*Bench*; x-axis) fitted on abundance data. The colour scale highlights the density of points in each scatter plot. (B) Distribution of the $\delta$ index characterizing change in sign (negative values indicate sign change) and magnitude (higher absolute values indicate higher numerical difference) between residual correlations estimated by the *WhC* model and the *Bench* model adjusted with abundance data for the three random effects (Habitat, Site, Year).](03-Chapitre1/figures/fig6.png){#fig:chapt1fig6}

## Discussion

Case studies in community ecology typically rely on partial and heterogeneous observations [@Pollock_2020] but also on incomplete knowledge of target species ecological features (e.g. traits, phylogeny; @Tyler_2012). This study investigated how *jSDM* performance varies depending on the type of information included (i.e. phylogeny, traits or data on non-target species) using a multi-assessment framework (spanning interpretability, inference and prediction, for both species- and community-level metrics, Table 1) enabling a thorough evaluation of model performance. 

We found that *jSDMs*’ performance, in particular predictive power of abundance models at the species level, mostly increased when including information related to the 179 non-target species sampled alongside with the 99 polychaetes of interest. However, improvement in species-level predictions does not directly translate into enhanced performance at the community level. The *WhC* model did not improve estimates of beta diversity or total abundance relative to the other models and largely overpredicted species richness, as previously suggested [@Zurell_2018]. Given *HMSC* hierarchical structure [@Poggiato_2021], inclusion of monitoring data related to other species likely improves model performance for the target assemblage by capturing relevant drivers that are not explicitly considered. For instance, it can help describe target species’ realized niches by accounting for ecological processes related to environmental conditions (including trait-mediated responses) or biotic interactions that are not explicitly captured otherwise [@Ovaskainen_2017a]. In our case, main differences between residual correlations estimated by the *Benchmark model* and the *Whole community* model relate to spatial random effects (i.e. site and habitat). In contrast, the temporal random effect yielded similar residual co-occurrences in both models. This suggests that including non-target species in our case, mostly helped capture spatial variability in species associations across sites and habitats.

Importantly, while we show that including non-target species can improve predictive performance, in particular for rare species, benefits of accounting for non-target species might vary depending on robustness of non-target species monitoring data (e.g. detection issues), their role within the ecosystem (e.g. engineer species are likely more influential on local communities than rare transient species), or processes shaping the target assemblage (if influence of abiotic factors dominates, then adding other species will have marginal consequences on model performance). While the list of additional species to consider can be prioritized based on existing knowledge in well-studied ecosystems, such information is often unavailable. Furthermore, a specific investigation, that might rely on simulated datasets to overcome limitations related to real world datasets [@DiRenzo_2022], would be required to determine specific criteria, as well as optimal number of non-target species to include. While species communities and assemblages are largely defined arbitrarily [@Stroud_2015], a systematic assessment of *jSDM* performance as increasing the number and types (for instance based on their functional or trophic roles) of non-target species would be valuable to optimise model performance for the species of management interests.

*jSDMs* have already been used to model the distribution of a wide variety of species ranging from micro-organisms [@Minard_2019] to megafauna [@Brimacombe_2020] inhabiting many different ecosystems. Here, while we studied assemblages associated with two specific coastal habitats, i.e. seagrass and sand, that have original characteristics as they are located at the land-sea interface [@Boye_2019a], our case study reflects typical aspects of applied ecological research. These include issues related to data limitation and availability but also typical features of ecological communities (e.g. prevalence of rare and transient species; @Magurran_2003) ; @SnellTaylor_2018). Valuable insights on trait-environment relationships are scarce in our study, which reflects how contributions of functional ecology in *jSDMs* are likely limited by trait data quality and availability [@Tyler_2012 ; @deJuan_2022]. For instance, we found an interaction between trophic modalities (i.e. microphagous versus macrophagous diet) and fetch (Fig. S15), indicating that organisms that filter on small particles are less likely to occur in wave-exposed sites where high levels of sediment resuspension can block their filtering systems [@Manning_2014]. Yet, the limited number of informative trait-environment relationships or species-environment relationships either suggest that neutral processes may shape polychaete assemblages [@Boye_2019a]; or rather highlight a mismatch between trait data, environmental data, and the ecological processes at play [@deJuan_2022]. For instance, environmental variables only capture mean climatological conditions, but fail to quantify variability in the coastal environment, such as extreme events and seasonal or annual variability. Likewise, the list of available fuzzy-coded traits only partially captures species capacity to adapt to environmental variability [@deJuan_2022]. Thus, effectiveness of inclusion of traits in *jSDMs* is likely to be limited, or to rely on effort to collect relevant trait information. In our case, while including traits does not improve model predictive power, it somehow enhances our understanding of species responses along environmental gradients. Hence, if the goal is not prediction but inference [@Tredennick_2021], including traits and proxies of phylogeny can facilitate *jSDM* interpretation.

This paper lays out an original framework to systematically compare multiple facets of alternative *jSDM* formulations (i.e. including phylogeny, traits or additional species) on model interpretability, explanatory and predictive power (Table 1). Using a set of complementary metrics, we specifically assess performance of alternative model formulations fitted to presence-absence or abundance data at the species and community levels. Our framework goes beyond existing guidelines proposed to assess the performance of *jSDM* fitted on presence-absence data [@Wilkinson_2020] or that focus on the predictive power of abundance-based models (e.g. @Waldock_2022). It specifically compares the performance (both explanatory and predictive) and interpretability of alternative models’ formulations accounting for the multiple and high-dimensional components that are typical of *jSDMs*, namely: (1) species and community level predictions including alpha and beta diversity metrics and ranking of predictions according to species prevalence/abundance; (2) species-environment relationships where we transposed the framework initially developed for time series by @Rigal_2020 into an effective tool to classify response curves according to 9 categories across high numbers of species (e.g. 99 in our case study); (3) trait-environment relationships; and (4) residual species-species correlations associated with random effects thanks to a new index that summarizes both changes in the sign and magnitude of the residual correlations.

Overall, our results provide new insights into the most appropriate strategies for *jSDM* fitting, according to modelling objectives [@Tredennick_2021] and available data. While the four models considered had similar explanatory power, adding extra information to standard *jSDMs* that only consider abiotic predictors can prove useful in cases. For instance, adding monitoring data for other non-target species can substantially increase model predictive power by modifying inferred species-environment relationships and residual correlation matrices. Similarly, adding traits or phylogeny can improve model interpretability. Future studies will be key to consolidate our findings on simulated case studies [@Zurell_2010 ; @DiRenzo_2022], or across contrasted ecosystems, for instance dominated either by environmental filtering, or by competitive processes. Generalizing this approach across ecosystems will further help prioritize data collection effort on the long term. For this purpose, we recommend using a multi-model inference framework similar to the one used in this study to systematically assess trade-offs associated with alternative jSDMs formulations. 

